---
layout: default
title: Sort == Srot
author: thomas
synopsis: How locales can effect sort-order
---

This may be something well-known to a lot of people, but it's one that I just
recently found out about. We were working with large volumes of data for our
[redirectory](http://www.aboutus.org/Learn/Keep-Track-of-Inbound-Links) feature
on (http://www.aboutus.org). For part of this we had to sort about 100 GB of
tab-separtated data. Because we wanted to do the simplest thing that would
work, GNU `sort` came to the rescue.

For those of you who aren't familiar with `sort`, it is a standard UNIX/Linux
tool that sorts the input it gets on standard in, and returns the new list on
stdout. It has all kinds of options to control the sort order, algorithms used,
etc., but some of them aren't too obvious. For the basic list, check out the
[man-page](http://linux.die.net/man/1/sort).

Before I go on, a brief exercise. Lexically sor the following lines:

     foo
     far
     f.o

If you guessed "f,o, far, foo", congratulations! You're a sane, normal person.
If, on the other hand, you guess "far, f.o, foo", you are GNU `sort`.

This was a serious problem for us because it meant that some of our data was
out of order, making our processing scripts angry. We would have `go-daddy.com`
stuffed in the middle of a long list of `godaddy.com`'s. Not good.

The solution lies in a little-known environment variable that controls your
terminal language and character set, "LC_ALL" (actually, LC_LOCALE but LC_ALL
works too). If you set that bit of magic to "C", things work as you would
expect.

By default on most modern linux installs, the system locale defaults to
US-english using UTF-8 character set. Beyond setting language and such, it also
sets things like how characters are ordered as far as a computer is concerned.
For whatever reason, punctuation is handled as "higher" than letters, even
though they are "lower" in the standard character set charts, and because
`sort` uses `strcmp`, character ordering is very important.

So there you go. If you are trying to sort a ton of data, and it's not coming
out sorted, give `export LC_ALL=C` a try. It worked for me!
