---
layout: default
author: sam
synopsis: We usually think of Agile and Open Source going hand in hand but there are some significant differences between an Agile organization and an Open Source one.
title: "Agile vs. Open Source: They're Actually a Little Different"
---

Last night I was hanging out at the North Portland Coder's Night
([nopoconi](http://calagator.org/events/search?tag=nopoconi)) and Ward and I got
to talking about the difference between Agile Software Development and Open
Source Software Development.  I'd always thought of the two together, but Ward
had some good insight into the differences in these two cultures and
methodologies that I realized fit well with my own experience.

While there's a lot of similarities between Agile and OSS philosophies, there's
a key fundamental difference.  Agile methodologies like [Extreme
Programming](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?ExtremeProgramming) are about getting the
[right people in the room](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?AllEngineersInOneRoom). Face
to face communication is much more efficient, says XP, and the best way to get
results is to have a small, empowered team of smart people in clear and
constant communication.

Open Source starts with a different idea; code should be available and editable
by anyone. Letting the people in the room make all the decisions isn't fair to
the people that *aren't* in the room.  What's most important is that the
processes are in place that allow people all over the world to contribute to the
codebase and improve the project.  This means being set up to review patches,
and have discussions (in IRC, forums, wikis) that anyone can participate in.
While agile strives to put a tight-knit team in close quarters, OSS strives to
create a community that anyone can participate in, despite their location or
circumstance.

While we were talking about this, I began to realize I'd seen these two patterns
in lots of software companies.  For example, at AboutUs, we all work in one big
room together (Ward once called it a Wiki space in
[video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I_75NoC85TE&feature=player_embedded)).
We have a small team.  When we have a question we can yell across the room.
That's agile.  A good friend of mine works on the Firefox team at Mozilla.  His
team members are all around the world and do most of their communication over
IRC, skype, and through issue trackers.

A lot of times we talk about building software as a choice between [Big Design
Up Front](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?BigDesignUpFront) and Agile methodologies, but
in fact there's a lot more options out there that we can draw upon to build
great software.
